# Normal Forms

---

## DB Tuning

Eliminate repeating groups.  

### 1NF

All atomic values, no repeated groups.

### 2NF

In 1NF.
No partial dependencies. All non-key attributes are fully functionally dependent on the entirety of the primary key.
Split into multiple tables.

### 3NF

In 2NF.
No transitive dependencies. Non-key attributes do NOT depend on non-key attributes.

### Boyce-Codd NF

In 3NF.
For every functional dependency (X -> Y), X is always a superkey.

---

## Big Data

VS relational databases:

- volume: amount of data stored and processed is much larger.
- velocity: rate of arrival of data is much higher.
- variety: not all data is relational.

### Sources and Uses

Sources:

- Log files.
- Data from mobile apps.
- Transaction data from retain enterprises.
- Data from sensors.
- Metadata from comm. networks.

Uses:

- Decision making about what to shown to the users.
- How a web site should be structured.
- Determining user preferences and trends.
- Advertisement display and click-through information.

Systems:

- Disttributed file systems
- Sharding across multiple databases.
- Key-Value storage.
- Parallel and Distributed databases.

#### Distributed file systems

Store files across collection of machines.
SIngle file system.
Storing unstructured data.
Google File System
Open-source Hadoop File System
Directory system
Mapping from file name to sequence of identifiers.
Ability to retrieve data from specific identifiers.

#### Sharding

Partitioning data across multiple databases with a subset of users assigned to each of the databses.
Defining range of keys that each of the databases handles.
Hash function that maps values to hashes.

#### Key-value

Store or update record based on an associated key.
noSQL

#### Parallel and Distributed Databases

Multiple machines.

### MapReduce

Processing and generating large datasets that can be parallelized across a distributed cluster of computers.

#### Paradigm

Map - input data is divided into smaller chunks, and a functiona called the map function is applied to each chuj independently. Transforms into key-value pairs.

Reduce - shuffled and sorted based on keys. Groups of key-value pairs with the same key are sent to the same reduces.

Models a common situation, map is applied to each of a large number of input.

Why MapReduce?

Word count application, large number of files as input, outputs a count of the number of times each word appears.

Single file runs locally, multi files parallelizes across many machines.

## Data Analytics

Processing of data to infer patterns, etc.
Decision making.
Stored in warehouses.
Basic form of analytics: generation of aggregates and reports summarizing data.
Plots and charts.
Online analytical processing (OLAP) systems: aggregate queries on large data in real time.

Complex internal organization structure.
Differnet data may be present in different locations.
Multiple locations, operational systems, schemas.
Repository or archive of information gathered from multiple sources, stored under a unified schema at a single site, designed to support business intelligence and providing consolidated and optimized data view.

Integration of data: integrate data from various sources which may include transactional databases, spreadsheets and other data repos.

Historial data storage: historical data to allow analysts and decision-makers to track trends and changes over time.

Optimized for Query and Analysis: optimized for transaction processing to answer questions and analysis.

Subject-oriented: focused on business subjects.

Data cleansing and transformation: data cleaning and transformation to ensure data quality and consistency.

Support for Decision Support Systems (DDSS): key component in decision support systems, providing data for analytical and reporting tools.

Scalability: need to be scalable to handle increasing volume of information.
