### CIA attributes
____________________________________________
Confidentiality -- only authorized personnel access the resources.
Integrity -- changes are only made by authorized personnel, and if they do occur, it is checked and detected.
Availability -- available at any given time (cloud, etc.).
Authenticity -- only users that have been confirmed via credentials, for example, a chain of verifications or even multiple sources (services).
Privacy -- specify access, modify data.

Non-authorized requires a security policy (usually explicit), something that defines who can access what.
### Vulnerability
_______
A weakness in an information system/application/etc that can be exploited by threat sources.
#### Types
###### Design 
Inserted during software design (authentication mechanism, etc).
##### Coding
Introduced during coding with security implications (missing end of buffer verification).
##### Operational
Caused by the environment in which its executed in (database accounts with empty passwords).
### 0--day
Exploit not publicly known (usually only a group of people know).
### Attack Vector
_____
Used in several senses (type of vulnerability, method used by a threat source to perform an attack).
Can be directed or not (company vs internet wide).
Technical or Social engineering ().
Manual or automated (can initially be manual and then automated).
### Attack surface
The sum of different points where someone can try and attack to gain unauthorized access.
Reducing it is a basic security measure.
Attacks come through interfaces.
## Software Development
___
### Goals of Software
Functionality -- more is better
Usability -- easier the better
Performance -- higher the better
Simplicity -- more is better
Time-to-market -- faster the better

These goals are contradictory to software security.
### Risk
Typically, an acceptable risk is the objective.
- Probability of successful attack = Threat level * Vulnerability level
- Risk = Probability of successful attack * Impact
Risk depends on the system environment (all software is 100% safe in a computer locked in a safe with no internet connection).
#### Factors
All types of vulnerabilities.
Implemented security controls.
Maturity of the software development process used.
Uncertainty of the above factors.
### Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC)
___
Formal or informal methodology for designing, creating and maintaining software.

### Design Principles to avoid vulnerabilities
___
#### Never assume or trust
"A chain is only as strong as its weakest link"
Do not assume clients can be trusted (input validation, authentication control decisions at the client side).
#### Use authentication mechanisms that can't be circumvented
Multi-factor authentication, adapting the complexity.
Prevent users from changing their identity (tokens can't be derived).
Tokens can't be stolen or left behind.
Authorization **only after** authentication.
#### Identify and protect sensitive data
Sensitive data depends on the context (can change with/without GDPR).
Steps to protect data:
1. Identify - the sensitive data
2. Discover - location and accessibility
3. Classify - data according to its value to the organization
4. Secure - employ appropriate controls to ensure integrity, availability and confidentiality
5. Monitor - measure and evolve security practices
#### Understand external components